So one more a little demo here
that's basically just building on
the last demo and
showing how you can take that last demo.
And then start to create something that's
a little bit more artful, I guess,
or something that's a little bit more
a step further than just a circle.
But you can take these random colors
from a dataset of risograph colors,
from a risograph printer maybe, and they
have a little code with them and a name.
And every time you click, chooses
a random color, plays a random node, and
changes the visuals.
And it's a very simple demo, it's not very
advanced, but you can see how it just
creates a bit more of an emotional feeling
than just a single circle on the screen.
This is also using one other little
thing that I'll go into here,
which is an effect.
And this demo is kind of inspired by
Patatap in a way of, kind of that's
where it got this inspiration of
the shapes randomly in the sounds,
cuz I really love Patatap,
such a nice whole thing.
So this is an example of how we can
start to wire in effects with tone.js.
So if we look at tone.js, we just
check their documentation, we go down,
we'll see a whole bunch of different
effects that we can choose from.
So there's a few that
I might explore today,
but you might have to look at
them also in your own time.
But the one I like to use just to start
off sometimes with these kinds of sounds
is a FeedbackDelay.
So if we go in here,
we'll see how to use it.
So the FeedbackDelay is a delay that
sort of feeds back on itself and
then slowly decays after some amount
of feedback that goes through.
And it can get to the point
if you set it up incorrectly,
where it's just continually feedbacking
and maybe getting louder and
louder or something,
and creating a problem.
But if you managed to tune the parameters
in a way that is nice and works,
then you have this nice sort of
delay that's a bit of an echo.
But this echo that builds on itself,
if you keep pushing it, and
it creates this really nice kind
of warm tone that you hear here.
[MUSIC]
So to use this,
we're gonna set up the FeedbackDelay,
the constructor here,
pass in the delay time and
we're gonna use 8 nodes here.
So this is the syntax
that tone.js supports.
Like I was mentioning earlier,
we could try just passing
in another value for time.
So if we go into the documentation for
time,
they show you a little
bit about how to use it.
It could just be numbers, which is in
seconds, and then we could have a very
exact second based delay, so let's say,
one second delay or something like that.
Or we could use this notation,
like triplets or 8 nodes, or
whatever for quarter nodes.
They also have some other ways of
representing time as well, and
there's even more details
there in this page here.
But just for now, I like to just
stick with the 8n or 4n, and
those are kind of nice and easy.
And then the second parameter here is
the feedback, and so we can try and
change these parameters just to see
how it sounds and hear how it sounds.
So if I was to use a very low value for
that feedback,
[MUSIC]
There's not quite as much action going on,
in fact,
it's really hard to hear any echoes.
And that's because every
time it's doing a feedback,
it's scaling the signal by this value.
And if the value is too low, then the
feedback signal basically just disappears.
And if it's too high, the feedback
is just gonna continually appear and
create this endless looping,
because it's never reducing the value.
So we wanna scale down the value by
some amount, so that eventually,
that echo disappears.
[MUSIC]
So you just need to find a nice
value that you like, maybe 0.6, 0.8,
something like that.
And so that's the FeedbackDelay.
And then just as with any other
node in tone js, it's quite simple,
you just connect the synth
to the feedbackDelay, and
then you can connect
the feedbackDelay to the master.
What I've decided to do here is to also
connect the synth directly to the master.
So what we have coming out
of the speaker is not just
the FeedbackDelay sound,
but also the synth sound.
Let's hear how it sounds without
connecting the synth to the master.
[MUSIC]
Now what we're hearing is just the echo,
so when I click, there's no sound and
it's an only after an 8th nodes do
I hear any sound being produced,
because the synth itself is
not connected to the master.
And so that's why you wanna connect both.
Okay, getting into
the next little demo here.
So in our tone demos,
I've shown a few of these,
this one here is effects.
So this is just going into a few
more effects similar as what we
were just talking about.
[MUSIC]
So in this effects demo,
We are using a few of them here,
we're using what's called reverb.
And the idea of reverb is that it
recreates the sound that happens when
you're in a large room.
So let's say you're in hall or
let's say you're in a concert hall even,
and you start shouting.
The waves that are coming
from your shouting and
the noise that you're creating,
they're going outwards and
hitting the walls of the room, eventually,
and bouncing back towards you.
And creating these reflections and
creating these sort of echoes
within the space itself.
And depending on the size of the room,
depending on the shape of the room,
depending on all these different factors,
you can end up with very
different types of echoes.
And these aren't echoes like when you're
in a cliff mountain and you're shouting,
and there's these massive delayed echoes.
It's more like more of a room
ambience that changes,
depending on if you're in a large room or
a small room or room with really
sort of like tight walls that will
not really reflect the audio as much.
So let's say you're in a room
that has better soundproofing and
a room that has worse soundproofing.
That all has to do with reverb.
And we can recreate those kinds of
effects by setting up a reverb node here,
giving it a decay and
these other properties.
And I'm gonna just pop open the API, just
so that we can double check what these do.
There's actually a couple of different
reverbs, because reverb is this common
thing that you get in audio but there's
a lot of different ways of exploring this.
And a lot of different libraries
that have to do with it,
a lot of different algorithms, and
a lot of different approaches.
We're just gonna use whatever
their default reverb node is.
And the decay option gives us, as it says,
the amount of time that
the reverberation is happening,
and there are some other options here, so.
The preDelay has something to do with,
perhaps,
the delay before the sound is supposed
to echo off or something like that.
And then wetness, when you hear the terms
wet and dry, so this effect right now.
When it says wet,
it means what's the percentage of
strength that we want this
effect to be outputting?
So if I was to say 1,
then the reverb will be at full strength.
And if I was to say 0, the reverb
will be at no strength at all, and
there won't be any really reverb
effect coming out of this output.
So 0.5 is in between, and I can actually
just comment out a few things and
set these up just to
show you how that sounds.
So if we were to do something like this,
where we do synth.connect(reverb);, and
then reverb.connect(Tone.Master);.
What we're doing is we're just listening
to the synth but through a reverb.
[MUSIC]
And
now let's just see how that
sounds without any reverb at all.
So we just connect the synth
directly to the master.
And you'll notice it cuts off
really quickly because there's no
sort of ambience, it doesn't feel
like we're in a big hall anymore.
We still need to send this
synth through the reverb, but
then we can change this wet
property here to 1, let's say.
[MUSIC]
And now the signal is fully
using this reverb and
all we're really hearing
is that the reverb.
Whereas if it was 0, probably all we
would really be hearing is the synth,
this reverb would be effectively off.
Yeah, exactly.
So that's why I decided to
go somewhere in the middle.
If you go too high,
all you hear is the reverb sound.
If you go too low,
you don't hear the reverb at all.
You have to use an asynchronous
generate to load the reverb effect.
And then there's some other effects that
I've got here, so another FeedbackDelay.
And then this one is a filter which allows
us to sweep a sort of frequency range and
cut it off entirely, which you might
hear when I start moving the mouse.
I'm just gonna go back to
the code that we had before here.
And then, finally,
we have our synth itself.
And the synth is a little bit more
complex than the previous synths,
because I have this options.
We can prefix a sine wave or
we can prefix a square wave or
triangle with this sort of fat,
it's like a fat sort of prefix,
which just makes the wave
sound really fat, I guess.
But the idea is that you spread
basically multiple frequencies somehow,
layering together to create this
kind of chorus of the synth.
And by changing these values here, it's
almost like multiple voices from a synth,
and allowing you to just
create a richer sound.
That sounds a little bit more interesting
than just a single sine wave or
single triangle wave.
And then the other thing that is happening
with this synth that's a little different
is that we're changing the envelope.
So one of the nice things with tone
js is that they have these envelopes.
And the envelopes have to do with
how the signal is being played, and
how the signal is echoing off and
being released kind of.
So it's always based on this idea
of attack, decay, sustain, release.
So ADSR is a pretty common
sort of idea within this
audio in digital audience space.
The attack is how fast the signal
turns on, and so that's in seconds or
milliseconds, perhaps,
in tone, it's in seconds.
So how fast the audio is turning on?
So when you hit the node, when you do
trigger attack, if you have an attack
of 0, let's say, and you were to run that,
it'll just play the sound immediately.
Or at least in this case,
it'll show graph, but
it doesn't seem to play
the sound in this demo.
But imagine it was playing a sound,
it would play the sound immediately.
If you increase the attack to one second,
it'll be a slow gradual
ramp up from silent to
full volume over the course of 1 second.
And then there's some other
properties like sustain,
is how long the node will sustain
itself after you push the node
down kind of, and
then releases once you let go of the node.
How long does it take
to turn that node off?
And the decay has to do with
between hitting the node on and
going into the sort of
sustaining part of the node.
And it's hard to explain with
this little tiny ADSR diagram.
But I will have a resource that will
probably explain it a little bit better
than I'm doing here,
which I'll show a little bit later.
And that's just something you could
play with that allows you to create
different shapes to the sound.
And it allows it to be
a little bit softer, so
that it's not just piercing
on off sort of sound.
And we're wiring it all up, just as we are
in all the audio demos here, connecting
the synth to the filter and then
connecting that filter to the effects.
Then connecting the effects to the reverb,
and then finally,
the reverb to the master.
And so the one thing I haven't
really mentioned yet is this filter.
And the filter will basically cut off or
allow through different frequencies or
maybe some range of frequencies.
So here based on the value fxu,
which is the x position of
the mouse divided by the width of
the screen, so some value between 0 and 1.
We're changing between the minimum,
which is 1,000 hertz, and
the maximum, which is, sorry,
100 hertz and 8,000 hertz.
And we're setting
the filter to that values.
Right now, I'm using this filter effect
to filter out certain frequencies.
And so we can use what's
called a low pass filter.
And what that's going to do is only
pass through filter frequencies that
go below the threshold
that we're going to set.
So to show how that's gonna work, first,
we make sure that that filter is connected
to this graft, connected to the system.
So in this case now, we have it so
that the synth connects with the effects,
which is then connected to the reverb.
And the reverb is finally
connected to the filter.
So the filter here is the last step before
hitting the speaker, the master output.
And then we scroll down and
we see where filter is being adjusted.
Here we're adjusting the frequency of
the filter, and we're adjusting it
between some minimum and maximum
range based on the mouse x position.
When this mouse x position is at the left,
it's going to use the filterMin.
When it's at the right of the screen,
it's gonna use filterMax.
And any mouse position in between
there is just going to blend those
two filter frequencies.
Just to show you, going up here,
the filterMin is 100 hertz and
the filterMax is 5,000 hertz.
And so, now, when we play these effects
and when we play these sounds, and when
we slide our mouse to the left, it's going
to start to filter out some of the sound.
[MUSIC]
And what's happening is that we're
cutting off a lot of frequencies,
we're only allowing the low
frequencies to pass through.
[MUSIC]
We're saying that only frequencies that
are lower than, let's say, whatever
this would be, 100 hertz or 200 hertz,
those are the only things coming through.
And then as it opens up,
it's getting into the 1,000 range hertz.
We start to hear higher and
higher frequencies.
[MUSIC]
And you can create some really nice
effects with that kind of a filter node.
You can also try using other things
like a highpass, which is the opposite,
it only passes through frequencies
that are above the threshold.
[MUSIC]
Or some of the ones that we explored
earlier in the course, like the bandpass.
And this is just going to pass
through only the frequencies
that are in the band
that we're specifying and
maybe some sort of left and
right frequencies around it.
[MUSIC]
And what that means here is that,
we're really only dedicating the signal
near the frequency we specify,
which might be, let's say 200 hertz.
And the only signals that are coming
through are kind of close to
that frequency band.
But low pass is quite a nice one for
these kinds of effects.
And the other thing we're doing on the y
position, this is when the mouse is going
up and down on the y position, we're
changing the wet value of our effect node.
So the wet value, remember,
the higher the wet value,
the more we're using that effect.
And the lower the wet value,
the less we're gonna hear, and
that affects your that FeedbackDelay.
So if we use fully wet,
then all we're gonna hear is the feedback.
If it's fully dry or there's no wetness,
all we're gonna hear is the synth itself.
[MUSIC]
So up here, there's no feedback,
down here, there's a lot of feedback
[MUSIC]
And we can start to create some
really interesting soundscapes,
just by modulating these and
by using different parameters here.
[MUSIC]
So I'm just tapping in different places.
But you can imagine some
sort of algorithmic system
that might be automatically
triggering these
nodes with different
parameters to create these
really rich and
atmospheric sounding outputs.
So that's just a little
bit about the filtering.